---
title: Adding tracing to ghcide
author: Michalis Pedalos
date: 2020-05-22
github: mpardalos
---

Welcome to the third post on the ongoing work on a unified Haskell IDE. This
week I will be talking about my Google Summer of Code project to *introduce
tracing into ghcide* using OpenTelemetry. I will explain the motivation for
this project and then explain what it actually entails, as well as what
improvements you should expect to see as a result of it.

<!--more-->

### What is the problem?

The internal architecture of ghcide is based on the
[Shake](https://shakebuild.com) build system. This is a tool similar in
principle to UNIX make, except implemented as a Haskell library. While using a
build tool as the core of an IDE might be surprising, it simplifies the
internals of the engine, and allows for reuse of information. This is a big
contributor to ghcide's speed. A more detailed explanation is given
[here](https://4ta.uk/p/shaking-up-the-ide).

It's not all rosy though. In order for shake to provide these benefits, it must
entirely (with some caveats) control the execution of the IDE engine. Shake
loads/parses/typechecks files whenever it sees fit, based on which files have
changed and what is requested by the editor. This means that reasoning about
performance becomes much harder. It's hard to tell what action is slow when you
don't know or directly control which ones are running.

### So what are you doing about it?

Addressing this problem is the core of my Google Summer of Code project: I will
be introducing tracing to ghcide. This essentially amounts to wrapping
interesting sections of code in `print "begin <section>"` and `print "end
<section>"`, albeit in a slightly more sophisticated way. This will allow us to
track which sections are running at any given time and for how long. I will be
doing this using [opentelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) and Dmitry Ivanov's
(\@ethercrow) `haskell-opentelemetry` library, allowing for better tooling
support over simple console logging.

OpenTelemetry is a set of tools and APIs for monitoring applications in a
variety of ways. We will be using its tracing portion which will allow us to
view traces from ghcide in any opentelemetry-compatible viewer, like
[Jaeger](https://jaegertracing.io/) or chrome's `about:tracing`. So, to address
some confusion from the reddit comments on last week's post, this has nothing
to do with telemetry, as used in e.g. Visual Studio Code or Windows. It is
explicitly opt-in and does not transmit any data over the network.

Matthew Pickering (\@mpickering) has already started this effort. He has added
initial support for tracing allowing us to get some basic traces. What I will
be adding is more detail. The way shake works is that you issue *Actions* to be
run, which can then request data, which based on some rules is calculated using
other Actions, etc. We can currently only trace the initial actions, not any of
their dependencies. For example, we now can see how long going to definition
takes in its entirety, but not how much of that time was spent loading or
parsing files. Adding this will give us a complete picture of what ghcide is
doing.

### That's great and all, but what do I get?

Great question! Indeed, this is a developer-facing feature. We are not
expecting users of ghcide to be looking at traces. We are hoping however it
will guide us towards a faster ghcide by showing us what parts are worth
improving. It should also make locating certain classes of bugs easier by
showing us if Shake is doing what we are expecting it to.

### Other Updates

As always, we have all been working on other projects as well this week.

* Luke Lau has been [implementing support](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/merge_requests/3330) for adding haddock documentation to
  functions using template-haskell to resolve a long standing GHC ticket.
* Fendor submitted his first [GHC patch](https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/merge_requests/3327) getting up to speed for the summer's project.
* Matthew Pickering has been finishing off the [multi component patch](https://github.com/digital-asset/ghcide/pull/522) with
  the careful review of Moritz and Pepe. It looks like it will be merged within
  the next week.
* Avi Dessauer released the first version of [implicit-hie](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/implicit-hie) which
  attempts to generate hie.yaml files for you.
* Zubin Duggal has continued working on integrating hie files into his fork of ghcide. You
  can read more about this in Zubin's blog post next week.



















